# WATER AND THE HYDROLOGIC CYCLE

Water in the atmosphere and large bodies of surface water play a central role in moderating temperature and controlling climate. They are the source of much of the water vapor in the atmosphere, and they store heat energy, exchanging it with the atmosphere. Another important consequence of the hydrologic cycle is the great diversity of Earth’s landscapes. The erosional and depositional effects of streams, waves, and glaciers, coupled with tectonic movements, have produced landscapes that make Earth’s surface unlike that of any other planet in the solar system. Through its effects on erosion and sedimentation, the hydrologic cycle is intimately related to the rock cycle. Finally, water is a key component of an array of biogeochemical cycles that control the composition of the atmosphere and influence all living creatures on Earth. The unique properties of water as a chemical compound make life possible on this planet. 

Like all of the cycles in the Earth system, the hydrologic cycle is composed of pathways and reservoirs. The pathways are the means by which water cycles between reservoirs. The reservoirs are the “storage tanks,” where water may be held for varying lengths of time. The total amount of water in the hydrologic system is fixed, but there can be quite short-term large fluctuations in local reservoirs. For example, a river may flood in one area, while a drought occurs in an adjacent area. On a global scale, however, these local fluctuations do not change the total volume of water in the Earth system; the hydrologic cycle therefore can be said to maintain a mass balance on a global scale. Overall it is a closed cycle, but within this closed cycle water is constantly shifting from one reservoir to another through a network of open subsystems. 

Although water is continuously moving from one reservoir to another, the volume of water in each reservoir is approximately constant over short time intervals. Over lengthy intervals, however, the volume of water in the different reservoirs can change dramatically. During glacial ages, for example, vast quantities of water were evaporated from the ocean and precipitated on land as snow. The snow slowly accumulated to build ice sheets that were thousands of meters thick and covered vast areas where none exists today. At the culmination of the most recent glacial age, the amount of water removed from the ocean was so large that sea level was about 120 m lower, and the expanded glaciers increased the ice-covered area of Earth by more than 300 percent. 

### Reservoirs in the Hydrologic Cycle 

The largest reservoir for water in the hydrologic cycle is the ocean, which contains more than 97.5 percent of all the water in the Earth system. This means that most of the water in the hydrologic cycle is saline, not fresh. This has important implications for humans because we are dependent on fresh water as a resource for drinking, agriculture, and industrial uses. Surprisingly, the largest reservoir of fresh water is the great polar ice sheets, which contain almost 74 percent of all fresh water. The ice sheets are a long-term reservoir; water may be stored there for hundreds of thousands of years before it is recycled. Of the remaining unfrozen fresh water, almost 98.5 percent resides underground in the next largest reservoir, groundwater. Only a very small fraction of the water passing through the hydrologic cycle resides in surface freshwater bodies, such as streams and lakes. A smaller amount resides in pore spaces in soils, and an even smaller amount resides for short periods in the atmosphere and the bodies of living organisms. In general, a correlation exists between the size of a reservoir and the average time that water stays in that reservoir, its residence time . Residence time in the large-volume reservoirs, such as the ocean and ice caps, is many thousands of years, whereas in the small volume reservoirs it is short—a few days in the atmosphere, a few weeks in streams and rivers, a few days or hours in the bodies of living organisms.

### Pathways in the Hydrologic Cycle

The movement of water among Earth’s reservoirs in the hydrologic cycle is powered by the Sun. Heat from the Sun causes **evaporation** of water from the ocean and land surfaces, in which water is converted from its liquid form to its vapor \(gaseous\) form. The water vapor thus produced enters the atmosphere and moves with the flowing air. With changing atmospheric conditions, some of the water vapor in the atmosphere undergoes **condensation**, changing from a vapor back into a liquid or solid state. The condensed water, gathering into droplets or particles, falls under the influence of gravity as **precipitation** \(such as rain or snow\) on the land or ocean. 

Rain falling on land may evaporate, or it may be intercepted by vegetation, subsequently returning to the atmosphere by evaporation from leaf surfaces. Plants also can return water to the atmosphere by transpiration, in which moisture taken up by plant roots passes through the plant and eventually evaporates from the leaf surfaces. Water that falls on the ground and doesn’t evaporate may drain off the land surface, becoming **surface runoff**. Some of it may be stored for a time in a surface water body, such as a lake or wetland. Some may slowly penetrate into the soil by **infiltration**, eventually becoming part of the vast reservoir of groundwater. Snow may remain on the ground for one or more seasons until it melts and the meltwater flows away into soils or streams. Snow that nourishes glaciers remains locked up much longer, perhaps for thousands of years, but eventually it too melts or evaporates and returns to the ocean.

