# Rates and History of Plate Movements

We know that convection in the mantle is a pretty slow process, but how fast do the lithospheric plates move across the surface? As a plate moves, everything on it moves too. If the top of the plate is partly oceanic crust and partly continental crust, then both the ocean floor and the continent move with the same speed and in the same direction. The first clear evidence that a seafloor and continent on the same plate of the lithosphere move together came from paleomagnetism; a series of remarkable measurements now provide even more convincing evidence about plate motion. 

The newest evidence of plate motion comes from satellites. Using laser beams bounced off satellites, scientists can measure the distance between two points on Earth with an accuracy of about 1 cm. Thus they can monitor any change in distance between, for example, Los Angeles on the Pacific Plate and San Francisco on the North American Plate. By making distance measurements several times a year, they can measure present-day plate velocities directly and accurately. Plate speeds based on satellite measurements closely agree with speeds calculated from paleomagnetic measurements. The close agreement between different measurement techniques implies that plates tend to move steadily rather than by starts and stops. For additional discussion of plate speeds and how they are measured. 

The combined results of the various approaches used to measure plate motion have revealed some basic information. Plates that carry lots of continental crust, such as the African, North American, and Eurasian plates, move relatively slowly. For example, the African Plate is nearly stationary \(evidenced by the fact that volcanoes there seem to be very long-lived\). In contrast, plates without any continental crust, such as the Pacific and Nazca plates, move relatively rapidly; in fact, these are the fastest moving plates. The point on the Pacific Plate that is farthest from its rotational axis \(the fastest moving point on a curved plate\) is moving at a speed of about 10 cm/y, about twice as fast as your fingernails grow. The Nazca Plate is adjacent to the Pacific Plate, and moving in roughly the opposite direction; its fastest moving point also has a speed of almost 10 cm/y. This means that the distance between these two points, one on the Pacific Plate and one on the Nazca Plate, grows larger by almost 20 cm/yr.

