# Topography of Ocean Basins

Oceans begin to form where rifting occurs along a divergent plate boundary. Heated from below, the lithosphere swells upward to form a broad plateau. The lithosphere thins, and its boundary with the asthenosphere comes close to the surface. This thinning occurs because magma rising toward the spreading center heats the lithosphere so that only a thin layer near the top retains the strength properties of the lithosphere. Tensional stress from the divergence of the plates eventually causes the lithosphere to break. The resulting rift is typically steep-sided, with pronounced topographic relief between the plateau and the floor of the rift valley. Seafloor spreading centers are typically raised, curvilinear ridges, like a long, jagged gash running the length of the ocean basin; the Mid-Atlantic Ridge is typical. 

As divergence proceeds, the two sides of the original rift move outward to form the edges of the newly and South America look similar—they are the two sides of the original rift along which the Atlantic Ocean first began to split and expand. However, modern continental shorelines usually don’t coincide exactly with the original split that started the rifting process. This is because some ocean water may spill out of the ocean basin onto the edges of the continent, covering the true edge of the continent. The flooded margin of a continent is known as the **continental shelf**. At the seaward edge of the continental shelf is a sharp drop-off called the **continental slope**. At the base of the steep continental slope is the **continental rise**, a region of gently changing slope where the seafloor flattens out and continental crust meets oceanic crust. This is the true geologic edge of the continent. 

![The true edge of a continent is where continental crust meets oceanic crust \(shown by the dashed line on this diagram\). This doesn&#x2019;t always correspond to the shoreline of the ocean basin, as defined by the edge of the water. This is because some of the water in the ocean basin may spill out onto the shallowly sloping continental shelf.](../../.gitbook/assets/image%20%2855%29.png)

Between the continental rise and the spreading ridge lies the rarely seen world of the deep ocean floor. Large, flat areas known as **abyssal plains** are a major topographic feature of the seafloor. These plains generally are found at depths of 3 to 6 km below sea level and range in width from about 200 to 2000 km. Abyssal plains form as a result of the mud settling through the ocean water and burying the seafloor topography beneath a blanket of fine debris. They are most common in the Atlantic and Indian oceans, which have large, mud-laden rivers entering them.

