# Observing and Measuring Earth Systems

### A New Science and a New Tool 

Indeed, a new science may arise because new tools allow new kinds of observation and measurement, and these in turn lead to new ways of thinking about some phenomena. Earth system science requires observations of Earth at various scales and the handling of large amounts of data from many different locations; new scientific tools are required, both to generate and to manage the data. 

Several decades ago, scientists from NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, realized that they were uniquely positioned to turn the scientific instrumentation originally developed for space exploration to a new use—that of studying our home planet and the changes being made by humans from a more comprehensive perspective. Spurred on by a 1988 report of the National Research Council recommending a space program focused on a study of Earth, NASA began a formal study program in 1991 called Mission to Planet Earth. Now known as Earth Science Enterprise \(ESE\), the mission is a comprehensive program for studying environmental changes from space and provides a mechanism for advancing the new discipline of Earth system science.

Scientists all over the world have had the opportunity to use data from a variety of Earth-observing instruments to gain a greater understanding of Earth’s natural processes on a global scale. This has contributed to our basic understanding of the Earth system and its cycles, such as clouds, water and energy cycles, oceans, atmospheric chemistry, land surface, water and ecosystems, glaciers and polar ice, and solid Earth. It also has improved the effectiveness of natural hazard prediction, natural resource management, and monitoring of human impacts on the environment. Viewing and recording the Earth system from space provides a grand-scale template, a context within which smaller-scale, land-based observations can be understood. Thus space-based observation not only provides a new view of Earth, it complements and enhances traditional land-based approaches.

![The exploration of space had an unexpected side-benefit: the opportunity to turn space-based instruments around and take a closer look at our own planet. Landsat, shown here in an artist&#x2019;s rendition, was one of the first satellites used by NASA in the 1970s to begin collecting data about Earth by remote sensing.](../../.gitbook/assets/image%20%2834%29.png)

### Earth Observation 

Observations of all types, on all scales, contribute to our understanding of the Earth system, but the quintessential tool of Earth system science is satellite-based remote sensing. **Remote sensing** is the continuous or repetitive collection of information about a target—Earth, in this case—from a distance. Remote sensing, more than any other new technology, has made possible observations on a grand scale, and many kinds of measurement and monitoring that could not otherwise have been accomplished. For example, the “ozone hole” over Antarctica—the decline in the concentration of ozone high in the atmosphere—is measured by remote sensing, using detectors carried on satellites. Other types of remote sensing technologies allow scientists to closely monitor changes in deserts, forests, and farmlands, as well as growth in human settlements, roads, and other parts of the built environment. 

When measurements are made remotely from satellites, scientists use the data in many areas of specialization. Satellite observations, above all other ways of gathering evidence, continually remind us that each part of Earth interacts with, and is dependent on, all other parts. Modern Earth system science was born from the realization of that interdependence and the availability of satellites to make measurements. The health of waterways and coastal zones, the impacts of pollutants, and the onset of natural disasters—all of these are now much easier to study and monitor, thanks to remote sensing technologies. 

Whereas satellite-based remote sensing has given us a new perspective on our home planet, new ways to explore other, previously inaccessible areas of Earth, have also added greatly to our knowledge. For example, starting in the 1960s small deep-sea remote-controlled and robotic submarines have allowed scientists to travel to the depths of the ocean. These submarines led to the discovery of life near deep-sea vents, revealing entirely new species, food chains, and ecosystems in formerly unknown and unimagined environments.

As important as new methods of measurement are new ways to store and analyze the vast amounts of data that scientists continue to accumulate about the Earth system. Geographic Information Systems \(GIS\), which are computer-based software programs, allow massive amounts of spatially referenced data points to be stored, along with their characteristics. From these, maps can be produced and sets of information of different kinds can be compared. For example, satellite images of a forest based on several types of remotely sensed data might show different types of vegetation, moisture content of the soil, surface temperature, road systems and buildings, and even the locations of human settlements. Several images can be layered on top of each other, and new data and images can be derived from the quantitative comparison of the various layers.

Not all of systems research is remote in the sense of remote in space. A lot is also remote in the sense of time. Earth has a long history, and that history has involved many changes of the land surface, of the locations of continents and oceans, and of the global climate. One of the most striking records of past climates is contained in the great ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica, which are sampled by cores drilled into the ice. The cores record a story of warmings and coolings of the climate over the last million years.

![Geographic information systems allow for the storage of large volumes of spatially referenced data points, along with their characteristics. The data can be used to produce maps showing the distribution of specific characteristics. The map layers can be combined and compared quantitatively, to yield derivative data and images.](../../.gitbook/assets/image%20%2835%29.png)

### 

