# ICE IN THE EARTH SYSTEM

Both sea ice and land ice play important roles in the Earth system, influencing processes that extend far beyond their own geographic limits. Circulation in the atmosphere and ocean, which in turn drive wind, weather, and global climate systems, are directly influenced by the presence of ice. 

### Influence on Ocean Salinity and Circulation 

Interactions among ice, ocean water, and atmosphere in the seasonal ice zone influence ocean structure, salinity, and circulation. Because it is only a few meters thick, sea ice in particular is very sensitive to temperature changes in the overlying atmosphere and in the ocean water below. In turn, the ice cover affects both the atmosphere and ocean in important ways. As mentioned earlier, the growth of sea ice increases salinity at the top of the mixed layer of the ocean because salt is excluded when seawater freezes. Conversely, when the ice melts, the salinity is decreased as fresh water is added to the ocean surface. 

The exclusion of salt as seawater freezes leads to the production of cold, saline \(and therefore dense\) water on the continental shelves. This dense water spills downward off the shelves into the ocean basins to produce deep water and bottom water. The process is enhanced in the marginal Antarctic seas, where offshore winds generate polynyas. Here, rapid ice growth under extremely cold conditions produces large quantities of dense water that sinks and is likely the source of much of the very cold, deep water in the Southern Ocean, called Antarctic Bottom Water. Similar processes operating in the Greenland and Norwegian seas are responsible for producing North Atlantic Deep Water. Both of these dense cold-water masses are crucial to maintaining the global oceanic circulation system, called the thermohaline circulation. 

### Influence on Atmospheric Circulation and Climate 

Both sea ice and land ice are important components of Earth’s climate system. The floating cover of sea ice effectively isolates the ocean surface from the atmosphere, thereby cutting off the exchange of heat between these two reservoirs; the more extensive the ice cover, the stronger the effect. Ice also has a high albedo , which means that an ice-covered surface reflects incoming solar radiation rather than absorbing it. This makes the ice-covered polar regions far colder than if the same areas were covered with water or land, both of which have lower albedo than ice. 

The resulting steep temperature gradient between low \(equatorial\) latitudes and ice-covered polar regions is of major importance to atmospheric circulation. This temperature difference drives our global atmospheric circulation and wind systems. If the temperature gradient between the equator and the poles were to become less steep, such as by a warming of the polar regions, it would have a major disruptive influence on atmospheric circulation. 

### Ice Cover and Environmental Change 

The fact that ice cover influences global climate leads to some important questions: How stable is the ice pack in the landlocked Arctic basin? What would it take to remove the thin ice cover completely, and how long would it take? In a time of interglacial climatic warming, might we expect the ice cover to disappear suddenly, thereby causing abrupt changes in climate in some of Earth’s most densely populated regions? Would there be an impact on sea level or salinity if sea ice were to melt completely? What about land ice? What organisms and ecosystems would be affected if the distribution of land or sea ice were to change? We can begin to address some of these questions through climate modeling. 

If the climate were to become colder, causing the ice cover to expand, the result would be a positive feedback. The increased area of ice would raise the total planetary albedo, leading to further cooling. The resulting growth of ice cover would cause a further increase in albedo, and so on. On the other hand, if the ice cover shrinks or disappears, significant disruption in the pattern of atmospheric circulation could occur. If polar ice were melted to reveal land or water, or even if the ice surface were covered with a dark material such as dust, soot, or ash from a volcanic eruption, a similar effect could happen. The darkening of the ice surface would cause the overall albedo to decrease, such that more incoming solar radiation would be absorbed. This would lead to further melting and shrinking of the ice cover, revealing additional dark, low-albedo surfaces \(water or land\), and a positive feedback cycle would ensue. 

Climate models suggest that in a warming climate, the warming at high latitudes will be several times that at low and middle latitudes. A possible scenario indicates that, as the Arctic warms up, we can expect a gradual shrinking of the ice pack followed by a discontinuous transition to ice-free conditions. We can easily calculate how much of a change would lead to the disappearance of perennial Arctic ice. It could occur, for example, with a 3° to 5°C increase in annual temperature, a 25 to 30 percent increase in solar radiation reaching the ice surface, a 15 to 20 percent decrease in summer albedo \(brought about by increased surface melting\), or a significant change in cloudiness. There are various ways in which a change in albedo could take place, but modeling suggests that once the albedo reaches a sufficiently low value, the shift to an ice-free Arctic Ocean would occur rapidly, measurable in years rather than in decades. 

Interestingly, the melting of sea ice would have much less impact on sea levels than the melting of land ice, such as the continental ice sheets that cover the landmasses of Antarctica and Greenland. This is because sea ice is floating directly in the ocean. You may recall that the Archimedes principle tells us that a floating object is supported or buoyed by a force equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by the object. An object will float at the level where it displaces a volume of water equivalent to its own weight \(as seen in Fig. 9.18\). If the object—an iceberg, for example—were to melt, the water would simply fill up the displaced volume formerly occupied by the iceberg. The compensation is not exact because the density of freshwater ice is not exactly the same as the density of salty seawater; therefore, the melting of sea ice would cause only a small increase in sea level, even if all sea ice were to melt.

For land ice, however, the situation is completely different. Landmasses that are covered by ice sheets are basically mountains that stick up above sea level, with a thick coating of ice on top. Unlike sea ice, if this land ice were to melt, all of its volume would be added into the ocean. Depending on the extent of the melting, it could lead to a significant increase in sea level. The loss of either sea ice or land ice, and the resulting changes in ocean water temperature and salinity, would have significant disruptive effects on species and ecosystems that are adapted to the current distribution of ice cover, as well as the indigenous people who depend on these resources. In Chapter 13 we will consider in greater detail some of the possible global warming scenarios that might lead to a melting of sea or land ice, with a resulting increase in sea level and other ecosystem changes.

