# Periglacial Landscapes and Permafrost

Land areas beyond the limit of glaciers also have an important influence on the landscape. In these **periglacial** zones, low temperature and frost action are important factors in determining landscape characteristics. Periglacial conditions are found over more than 25 percent of Earth’s land areas, primarily in the circumpolar zones of each hemisphere and at high altitudes. 

### Permafrost 

The most characteristic feature of periglacial regions is perennially frozen ground, also known as permafrost— sediment, soil, or even bedrock that remains continuously below freezing for an extended time \(from two years to tens of thousands of years\). The largest areas of permafrost occur in northern North America, northern Asia, and the high, cold Tibetan Plateau \(Fig. 9.1\). It has also been found in many high mountain ranges, even including some lofty summits in tropical and subtropical latitudes. The southern limit of continuous permafrost in the northern hemisphere generally lies where the mean annual air temperature is between about 5 and 10°C. Most of today’s permafrost is believed to have originated during either the last glacial age or earlier glacial ages. Remains of woolly mammoth and other extinct ice-age animals found well preserved in frozen ground indicate that permafrost existed at the time of their death. The depth to which permafrost extends depends not only on the average air temperature but also on the rate at which heat flows upward from Earth’s interior and on how long the ground has remained continuously frozen. The maximum reported depth of permafrost is about 1500 m in Siberia. Thicknesses of about 1000 m in the Canadian Arctic and at least 600 m in northern Alaska have been measured. These areas of very thick permafrost all occur in high latitudes outside the limits of former ice sheets. The ice sheets would have insulated the ground surface and, where thick enough, caused ground temperatures beneath them to rise to the pressure melting point. On the other hand, open ground unprotected from subfreezing air temperatures by an overlying ice sheet could have become frozen to great depths during prolonged cold periods.

### Living with Permafrost

In permafrost terrain, a thin surface layer of ground that thaws in summer and refreezes in winter is known as the active layer. In summer this thawed layer tends to become very unstable. The permafrost beneath, however, is capable of supporting large loads without deforming. 

Permafrost presents unique problems for people living on it. If a building is constructed directly on the surface, the warm temperature developed when the building is heated is likely to thaw the underlying permafrost, making the ground unstable. Arctic inhabitants learned long ago that they must place the floors of their buildings above the land surface on pilings or open foundations so that cold air can circulate freely beneath, thereby keeping the ground frozen. 

Wherever a continuous cover of low vegetation on a permafrost landscape is ruptured, melting can begin. As the permafrost melts, the ground collapses to form impermeable basins containing ponds and lakes. Thawing can also be caused by human activity, and the results can be environmentally disastrous. Large wheeled or tracked vehicles crossing Arctic tundra can quickly rupture it. The water-filled linear depressions that result from thawing can remain as features of the landscape for many decades. 

The discovery of a commercial oil field on the North Slope of Alaska in the 1960s generated the need to transport the oil southward by pipeline to an ice-free port. The company formed to construct the pipeline was faced with some unique problems. In order for the sticky oil to flow through a pipeline in the frigid Arctic environment, the oil had to be heated. However, an uninsulated, heated pipe in the frozen ground could melt the surrounding permafrost. Even if the pipe were insulated before placing it underground, the surface vegetation cover would be disrupted, likely leading to melting and instability. For these reasons, along much of its course the Alaska Pipeline was constructed on piers above ground, thereby greatly reducing the possibility of ground collapse.

