# Food Webs

So both energy and materials are cycled through ecosystems by way of feeding relationships. However, in most ecosystems, feeding relationships are more complicated than at Mono Lake, where the food chains are simple enough that each organism functions on just one trophic level. When there are several interconnected food chains in an ecosystem that involves complex eating relationships and interactions, we call it a **food web**. 

Consider, for example, the food web of the harp seal, in which five trophic levels are identifiable. Phytoplankton, microscopic floating plants, are the autotrophs; they carry out primary production at the first trophic level. Tiny floating animals, or zooplankton, are the first-order consumers; they are heterotrophs that feed on the phytoplankton at the second trophic level. At the third trophic level are fish, mollusks, and other organisms that consume the zooplankton. At the fourth level are several types of fish that consume other fish. The harp seal feeds at several trophic levels, from the second through the fourth, eating everything from tiny zooplankton to all types of fish. It even feeds on the predators of some of its prey and thus is a competitor with some of its own food. A species that feeds at several trophic levels is classified as belonging to the trophic level above the highest from which it feeds, so we consider the harp seal to be on the fifth trophic level. 

In a more realistic manner than the simplified food chain, a food web illustrates the movement of both energy and matter through a complex set of feeding interactions. \(Note, however, that for all its complexity, the harp seal food web still includes just five trophic levels, or six if you consider that a polar bear might come along and eat the seal.\) Energy moves through the food web in a complicated, circuitous, but ultimately one-way flow, but materials are cycled over and over again to provide nutrients for organisms at all levels. This recycling of materials is not 100 percent leak-proof, though. One can imagine many circumstances whereby materials might be transferred from one part of an ecosystem, or from one local ecosystem to another—an eagle could carry a mouse to its nest far away, or a river might bring waste products and sediments to the ocean, for example. It is part of the fundamental nature of environmental systems to be open, to allow energy to flow freely through, and to recycle materials, while still allowing some passage of materials into and out of the local system.

