# Aquatic Biomes

Aquatic biomes are distinguished primarily on the basis of differences in salinity. Thus, there are three major groups of aquatic biomes—freshwater, marine, and transitional— with further subdivisions based on temperature, depth, penetration of light, and distance from the shore. Saltwater \(marine\) and freshwater biomes differ from one another in some fundamental ways, aside from the salinity of the water. For example, the ocean is much more strongly affected by tides than even the largest lakes. Waves and deep currents are generally stronger in the ocean than in lakes, and the depth of the water is considerably greater. This means that low light levels, cold temperatures, and even high pressures can place significant constraints on oceanic organisms.

Organisms in these various aquatic environments generally fall into one of three categories: plankton, nekton, and benthos. Plankton are extremely tiny, free-floating or swimming organisms. Of these, as mentioned previously, phytoplankton are aquatic plants and algae, the primary producers that form the base of the food chain in aquatic ecosystems, and zooplankton are aquatic animals, including the larvae of some larger organisms. Nekton are larger animals that are active swimmers, including fish, whales, turtles, and dolphins. Finally, benthos is the collective term for bottom-dwelling organisms. This includes organisms that attach themselves to rocks, such as barnacles and mussels; plants that are rooted in bottom sediments; organisms that burrow into bottom sediments, such as octopi; and some organisms that move along the bottom, such as crustaceans.

### Freshwater and Transitional Biomes

Freshwater biomes can be divided into flowing-water and standing-water types. Land-based freshwater environments \(rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and wetlands\) are separated from saline marine environments by several types of transitional biome. 

FLOWING-WATER ENVIRONMENTS. Rivers and streams are dynamic environments. A river can vary dramatically from its source to its mouth, where it empties into another body of water. Upstream or “headwater” streams tend to be small, cold, and swiftly flowing, whereas downstream rivers tend to be wider, deeper, cloudier, and not as cold. Changes in topography also dramatically affect the character of a stream; steep topography leads to deeply incised, fast-flowing streams, whereas on flat plains, rivers meander lazily from side to side. Some rivers change seasonally, drying up during one season and overflowing during another. Organisms that live in fast flowing streams have adaptations that help them survive in strong currents, such as suckers for attaching onto rocks, or a streamlined, muscular build for swimming up-current. 

STANDING-WATER ENVIRONMENTS. Standing-water environments include lakes, ponds, and wetlands. A lake is a standing body of fresh water that occupies a large depression; ponds are smaller standing freshwater bodies. Lakes contain several zones, defined by a combination of depth, temperature, and distance from the shore. The warm, shallow, near-shore area is called the littoral zone. This is the most biologically productive part of a lake, with abundant plant life \(cattails, sedge grasses\), as well as birds \(ducks and other waterfowl\), insects, reptiles, and amphibians. The open-water environment is called the limnetic zone, which hosts zooplankton and phytoplankton, as well as the larger organisms, mainly fish, that eat them. The limnetic zone extends as far down as light can penetrate \(the photic zone; see below\). Below this is the profundal zone, which only occurs in the largest and deepest lakes. Organic material in the profundal zone consists mainly of dead organisms that float down and are consumed by bacteria. 

The temperature of the water in a large lake can vary greatly from the surface, where sunlight heats the water, to deeper levels, where the water is typically much colder. This is called thermal stratification, and it greatly influences the biota that can occupy the various zones. Cool water sinks to the bottom of a deep lake because it is dense. As sunlight hits the lake, the surface waters become warmer and less dense. This is a stable thermal stratification—cold, dense water at the bottom, and warm, less dense water at the top. The depth where the temperature changes very rapidly from warm to cold is called the thermocline \(defined in Chapter 10 in the context of ocean thermal stratification\). In the tropics, the temperature difference between the surface and deep layers is less strong because there is no seasonal cooling of the surface waters; thus, the thermal stratification in tropical lakes is not as pronounced as in temperate lakes.

TRANSITIONAL ENVIRONMENTS. Aquatic environments in coastal regions are transitional between freshwater and saltwater environments. An example is the estuary, a body of water that is connected to the open ocean but has an incoming supply of fresh water from a river. Salt water and fresh water mix in estuaries, and water levels, salinity, and temperature fluctuate with the rise and fall of the tides. Organisms that inhabit estuaries must be adapted to tolerate these variations. A common feature of temperate estuaries is a salt marsh, a coastal wetland dominated by salt-tolerant grasses. Salt marshes typically host abundant shore birds. The tropical equivalent is mangrove forests, coastal wetlands that host some of the most productive fisheries in the world. Estuaries, salt marshes, and mangroves, like other wetlands, perform many important ecological functions, including cleansing the soil and providing habitats for many different species. Coastal wetlands also protect the shoreline against the battering energy of oceanic storms. Unfortunately, coastal development is threatening mangrove forests and other coastal wetlands in many localities. 

### Marine Biomes

 We looked briefly at the zones of the ocean in Chapter 10, but here we revisit them from a biological perspective. The primary subdivision of oceanic biotic zones is based on the depth of the water, and thus on the penetration of light into the water. The photic zone \(or euphotic zone\) is the topmost layer of ocean water, where light penetrates and photosynthesis can occur. The photic zone extends from the surface down to the maximum depth of sunlight penetration—about 150–200 m. Below this is the aphotic zone, where little to no light is able to penetrate. \(Sometimes a transitional zone of low light levels, called the disphotic zone, is identified between these two zones.\) Marine environments and the biotic zones they support are further categorized on the basis of distance from the shore, depth of water, and relationship to the bottom. 

NEAR-SHORE ENVIRONMENTS. As in lakes, the parts of the ocean that are near the shoreline are referred to as the littoral zone. The oceanic littoral zone is sometimes called the intertidal zone, which captures its transitional nature. This is a dynamic environment, where the influence of tidal variations and the energy of breaking waves are strong. Rocky or cliffed shorelines typically host organisms that can attach themselves to rocky surfaces, such as mussels and certain types of algae, and other organisms that can survive periodic drying out during low tide. Some residents of rocky shorelines survive by burrowing and hiding between the rocks. Another common type of shoreline is the sandy beach, where small animals like sand crabs burrow into the sand to escape the breaking waves and the ebb and flow of the tides.

OPEN-WATER ENVIRONMENTS. The pelagic zone is the open-water environment of the ocean. The pelagic zone consists of the neritic province, which extends from the shore out to where the water reaches a depth of 200 m, and the oceanic province, which encompasses the rest of the pelagic zone—that is, most of the open ocean. Further subdivisions are based on depth: the topmost layer is the epipelagic zone, extending to a depth of about 200 m \(coincident with the photic zone\); the mesopelagic zone, extending to a depth of 1000 m; the bathyal \(or bathypelagic\) zone, extending to a depth of 4000 m; and the abyssal \(or abyssopelagic\) zone, extending to a depth of 6000 m. The deepest part of the ocean, called the hadal \(or hadopelagic\) zone, exists only in the deepest oceanic trenches, more than 6500 m below the surface. 

Organisms that inhabit the pelagic zone are floating or swimming organisms. The near-shore photic zone is the most biologically productive marine environment; the water is relatively warm, and light levels are high. This environment supports abundant phytoplankton and, therefore, zooplankton and the nekton that feed on them. Nekton include the rich diversity of marine life, including large and small fish, sharks, swimming mollusks, and marine mammals, such as whales. Beneath its relatively warm, light surface layer, the oceanic province extends to great depths. No light penetrates the deep waters of the bathyal and abyssal zones. The temperature is constant, but cold, and the pressure is high. Organisms must adapt to these extreme environmental conditions. Many of the fish that inhabit these deep waters have light-producing organs that help them find prey or potential mates. Soft bodies prevail, and fish tend to drift slowly, rather than swimming vigorously. Since photosynthesis is limited by the lack of light, primary biological productivity is low. Organisms feed on organic debris that rains down from above; thus, many of the larger fish are equipped with adaptations such as scooping jaws. 

BOTTOM ENVIRONMENTS. The benthic zone is the ocean floor environment. “Benthic” is often misinterpreted to mean “deep,” but in fact it simply refers to the “bottom” of the water body. Hence, the benthic environment may be very deep, as it is in the open ocean, or it may be very shallow, as it is in the littoral zone. The benthos of the deep parts of the ocean—the bathyal and abyssal zones—consists mainly of burrowing marine animals and bacteria. The sediment of the deep ocean floor is dominated by the tiny skeletal remains of zooplankton, which rain down and accumulate on the bottom. In the deepest parts of the benthos—the deep oceanic trenches— the geologic environment is dominated by hydrothermal vents with black smokers. The organisms in this environment are adapted to a completely dark environment, and their primary biological productivity comes from chemosynthesis, rather than from photosynthesis. 

In contrast to the extreme environment of the deep ocean bottom, the shallow-water benthic zone is a warm, light, and highly productive environment. In water up to about 10 m deep, salt-tolerant sea grasses grow in bottom sediments. They provide food and protection for a wide variety of fish, crustaceans, reptiles, and bottom-dwelling detritivores, such as mud shrimp. In deeper, cooler water \(up to about 25 m\), huge beds of kelp—brown algae—form the bottom of the marine food chain for many organisms, including sponges, sea cucumbers, clams, crabs, fish, and mammals such as sea otters. A particularly productive benthic environment is the coral reef. Coral reefs are worthy of special mention, not only because they are a biologically productive biome, but also because they are sensitive indicators of environmental stress. They also perform an important role in the recycling of nutrients in shallow coastal environments and provide physical barriers that dissipate the force of waves.

