# Terrestrial Biomes

The distribution of terrestrial biomes is closely related to the geography of climate, which is fundamentally influenced by the air masses that move heat and moisture around the planet. Recall from Chapter 12 that convection in the atmosphere combines with the Coriolis effect to create huge cells of rising and falling air masses, forming three belts of high rainfall and four belts of low rainfall. The belts of high rainfall lie along the equator, resulting in moist tropical climates, and along the two polar fronts, resulting in moist temperate climates. The belts of low rainfall generate two zones of dry climate in the polar regions and two in the subtropical regions, along the 30° N and 30° S latitudes. The effect of the wet and dry belts on the biogeography of biomes is most clearly demonstrated by the global distribution of deserts; most of the world’s large deserts lie within these belts of dry air.

### The Major Terrestrial Biomes

Here is a brief summary of the major terrestrial biomes. Some terrestrial biomes have alpine \(mountain or montane\) variations because altitude exerts a major control on both temperature and precipitation, and, therefore, on vegetation and animal life.

TUNDRA. Tundra, or arctic tundra, is a terrestrial biome that occurs in the north, at high latitudes. The mountain equivalent, alpine tundra, occurs at high altitudes closer to the equator. Tundra is characterized by treeless plains and by permafrost, soil that is perennially frozen except for a thin surface layer that thaws in the summertime. Winters are long, cold, and harsh; summers are short and cool, with little precipitation. Plants are typically small, because of the short growing season and low light levels during much of the year, and include mosses, grasses, sedges, lichens, and dwarf shrubs. Small mammals such as voles, marmots, arctic foxes, and snowshoe hares are common, along with large mammals such as muskox, and herds of migratory mammals such as caribou. The tundra is a sensitive environment; because of the short growing season and harsh conditions, tundra ecosystems do not regenerate easily if disturbed or damaged.

BOREAL FOREST. Forests are the most widely varied of the major biomes. The taiga or northern boreal forest lies to the south of the tundra in North America and Eurasia. There is no southern equivalent to either the tundra or the boreal forest because there isn’t much land area in comparable latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere. The taiga is characterized by cold winters \(though not as cold as the tundra\), short growing seasons, and low levels of precipitation. The boreal forest mainly consists of coniferous trees \(evergreens with cones\), such as spruce, fir, and pine trees, as well as mosses and lichens. Conifers are adapted to conditions of low precipitation. They have needlelike leaves with little surface area, which minimizes moisture evaporation. Animals of the taiga include large migratory mammals such as caribou and moose, and many smaller mammals such as rabbits, foxes, wolves, a wide variety of rodents, birds, and insects, but few reptiles or amphibians \(because there is not enough water\).

TEMPERATE RAIN FOREST. The temperate rain forest is a mainly coniferous forest, typical of the northwest coast of North America \(Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia\), but also found in other locations, such as southeastern Australia. The winters are milder than in the far north and precipitation is high, so the evergreen forests grow thick and tall. These rich wood producing regions have hosted some bitter confrontations between loggers and environmentalists. Typical trees of the temperate rain forest include pine, fir, redwood, and cedar. Epiphytes \(ferns, vines, and mosses that grow attached to the branches of trees\) also grow in abundance. Bears, mountain lions, wolves, and elk are common, as well as smaller rodents, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. 

TEMPERATE DECIDUOUS FOREST. The temperate deciduous forest occurs mainly in the northeastern United States, Europe, and eastern China, where the climate is characterized by seasonal changes from summer to winter. These forests consist mainly of broadleaved deciduous trees, that is, trees that shed their leaves each year, including maple, oak, birch, and elm trees. The soils are rich in organic material, and well suited for agriculture. Deer, bears, and wolves are common, though now limited to the localities where temperate deciduous forests have not been cleared for agriculture or urban development. 

TROPICAL RAIN FOREST. The great tropical rain forests of the equatorial regions host an enormous diversity of organisms. Both temperature and precipitation are high, and the growing season lasts all year, so the vegetation is very tall and dense. These are closed forests, in which the canopy, or top layer of vegetation, forms an almost continuous cover; consequently, the forest floor can be quite dark. There is an astonishing array of plant and animal life in these forests, including a wide range of birds, insects, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, epiphytes, and flowering plants, such as orchids and bromeliads. Most of the mammals, such as monkeys and lemurs, live in the canopy and rarely descend to the forest floor or understory. The soils in tropical rain forests tend to be highly weathered and low in organic matter. This is because most of the organic matter resides in the lush vegetation, rather than in the soils. With so much warmth and moisture available, there is an abundance of decomposers, including bacteria, fungi, and some types of insects, which break down and consume organic debris almost as quickly as it falls to the ground. Because tropical soils contain so little organic matter, when exposed by deforestation they dry out and are easily eroded. This is one of the reasons why it is problematic when tropical rain forests are cut down. 

TROPICAL DECIDUOUS FOREST. The equatorial region also hosts large tropical deciduous forests, also called tropical seasonal forests or monsoon forests, in which the trees shed their broad leaves during the dry season. The main seasonal variation is in the amount of precipitation, although there is greater temperature variation than in the tropical rain forest. Tropical rain forests and tropical deciduous forests together are referred to as the tropical moist forest system. The largest of these is Amazonia, in South America, but other major tropical moist forests are in Southeast Asia \(Indonesia\) and equatorial Africa. In addition to hosting much of the planet’s biodiversity, the tropical moist forests represent an enormous reservoir for carbon in the global carbon cycle. 

SAVANNA. Tropical and subtropical savanna is a type of open forest consisting of broad, grassy plains with scattered trees and lacking a continuous canopy. Temperatures are high but rainfall is low, particularly during the long dry season. The best-known savanna is the African Sahel \(from sahel, the Arabic word for “border”\), which lies along the southern margin of the Sahara Desert. African savannas host huge herds of migratory mammals, such as antelope, zebras, and elephants, and large predators, such as lions and tigers. This is a fragile environment, primarily because of the low precipitation. When overstressed by intensive agriculture and grazing, savanna can quickly turn into desert. 

CHAPARRAL. The biome that is typical of a Mediterranean climate—hot, dry summers and cool, wet winters—is the chaparral, characterized by low, scrubby evergreen bushes and short, drought-resistant trees. Chaparral occurs in the region surrounding the Mediterranean Sea, but is also found in the southwestern United States, as well as parts of Australia, Africa, and South America. Fires are common in chaparral regions, and some plants have fire resistant adaptations, such as below-ground growth that is able to reemerge following a fire. 

GRASSLAND. Temperate grasslands are the huge, extensive prairies typical of the midwestern United States and Canada, as well as the Ukraine. Grasses have extensive, interconnected root systems. Grasslands are particularly well suited to agriculture because of the rich organic content of the soils. There are two basic types of grasslands. Temperate moist grasslands, also known as tallgrass prairies, once hosted great herds of bison and elk, and predatory wolves. Shortgrass prairies are drier, and the grasses are shorter and more drought-resistant. Typical animals in shortgrass prairies include prairie dogs, snakes, and lizards. 

DESERT. We finish off the low-precipitation extreme of the terrestrial biomes with deserts. Although we often think of deserts as being hot, lack of precipitation is actually the main defining characteristic. The term desert refers to arid lands, where annual precipitation is less than 250 mm. In all deserts, plant cover is sparse. Desert plants are adapted to the lack of water, including the many varieties of cacti and succulents, which have few or no leaves and are able to retain large quantities of water. Animals adapt to the extreme temperatures and dryness by storing water, remaining hidden during the day, hunting or foraging at night, or tunneling underground during extended dry periods.

