# Biogeochemical Cycles

In the course of living and dying, organisms continuously exchange energy and matter with their environment. This exchange occurs at the scale of the individual organism, the ecosystem of which it is a part, and the global biosphere. The metabolic consumption and production of gases such as CO2 and CH4 is a good example of how organisms may exert global controls on Earth’s climate. Carbon dioxide and methane are greenhouse gases: gases that absorb heat emitted by Earth and trap it in the atmosphere. When organisms produce more CO2 and CH4 than they consume, the climate will warm; when they consume more CO2 and CH4 than they produce, the climate will cool. The concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is not the only control on global climates, but it is an important one that directly involves the biosphere. 

Geobiologists keep track of exchanges between the biosphere and other parts of the Earth system by studying biogeochemical cycles. A **biogeochemical** cycle is a pathway by which a chemical element or compound moves between the biological \(“bio”\) and environmental \(“geo”\) components of an ecosystem. The biosphere participates in biogeochemical cycles through the inflow and outflow of atmospheric gases by respiration, the inflow of nutrients from the lithosphere and hydrosphere, and the outflow of those nutrients through the death and decay of organisms. 

Because ecosystems vary in scale, so do biogeochemical cycles. Phosphorus, for example, may cycle back and forth between the water and the microorganisms in the pores of sediments, or it may cycle back and forth between uplifted rocks in mountains and the sediments deposited along the margins of ocean basins. In either case, when phosphorus-containing organisms die, the phosphorus may accumulate in a temporary repository before being recycled. Sediments and sedimentary rocks are an important repository for this element. 

Knowledge of biogeochemical cycles is important for understanding the mechanisms associated with major geobiological events throughout Earth’s history, as we will see later in this chapter. It is also critical for understanding how elements and compounds that humans emit into the atmosphere and ocean are interacting with the biosphere

