# Environmental Change and Biodiversity

The history of life’s biological diversification has been driven by the availability of new environments on the one hand, and evolutionary innovations by successful organisms on the other. Rapid diversification results when a new “invention” \(jaws in fish, the amniotic egg in reptiles\) provides an organism with adaptive advantages for a life in a new or changing environment. 

Organisms not only respond to environmental change but also create it. The oxygenation of the atmosphere by early photosynthetic organisms is an example of a major environmental change that provided many new opportunities for diversification. An example at a smaller spatial scale is the vertical structural complexity provided by trees. In a tropical rain forest, for example, the top of the tree provides a sunlit environment that receives much rainfall, while down near the base of branches there can be shaded and comparatively dry habitats. This structural complexity provides opportunities for organisms to adapt to multiple, varied environments, and this has contributed fundamentally to the evolution of the immense biological diversity that characterizes tropical rain forests today. Other complex environments also tend to be biologically diverse; think of coral reefs, for example, or mangrove swamps. 

However, a modification that adapts a species to a niche \(functional role\) that is already occupied may confer little immediate advantage, even though the new species may be adaptively superior to the incumbent one. Such was the case with the mammals. Originating in the Triassic Period, mammals were from the start more attuned to the niches they now occupy than were the established occupants, the dinosaurs. With more capable brains, faster metabolism, a uterus to shelter the fetus, milk for postnatal nourishment, and parent–offspring bonding, the early mammals had greater potential to exploit dinosaur niches than had the dinosaurs themselves. The great dinosaurs had command of the food supply, however, and the mammals, instead of growing larger, became smaller— perhaps small enough not to interest carnivorous dinosaurs. So they remained for 150 million years, until the end of the Cretaceous Period. 

When dinosaurs became extinct, the mammals moved in to occupy vacated niches, with a burst of diversification that began in the Paleocene Epoch and continued through the Eocene Epoch. Mammals continued to adapt over that time. For example, by comparing brain-to-body weight ratios in archaic and modern reptiles and mammals, it can be shown that mammalian brain size has increased. This is a continuing process, whereas in reptiles such an increase has not occurred: The brain-to-body ratios in modern reptiles do not differ significantly from those in archaic ones.

