# EVOLUTION: THE HISTORY OF LIFE

Evolution gives a quality to life that sets it apart from the nonliving world. A crystal of quartz that grows today is fundamentally the same as a crystal of quartz that grew 3 billion years ago. Living organisms, however, change over time. Today’s organisms have arisen as a result of change. This change affects not only the individual organism in its life cycle of birth, metabolism, growth, reproduction, and death, but also the population to which it belongs, which is always responding to environmental fluctuations and occasionally undergoing more radical changes that can result in the generation of new species. 

Through geologic time, the early, simple, single-celled organisms eventually diversified into the vast array of species that inhabit Earth today. The theory of evolution says that new species evolve from old species. Applied to the history of life on Earth, this means that all present-day organisms are descendants, through a gradual process of genetic change and adaptation to environmental conditions, of different kinds of organisms that existed in the past. 

### The Mechanisms of Evolution 

Evolution is achieved through the process of **natural selection**, in which individuals that are well adapted to their environment survive and are reproductively successful, whereas individuals that are poorly adapted to their environment are reproductively unsuccessful and therefore tend to be eliminated from a population. 

Natural selection occurs because the characteristics of individuals are passed from one generation to the next through their genes. In any given environment, some traits will be more advantageous than others. For example, certain characteristics might enable an individual to compete more effectively for scarce resources or to escape predators more easily. If environmental conditions change, possession of a particular trait may provide a new survival advantage to some individuals. When individuals possess characteristics that enable them to respond effectively to changes in environmental conditions, they will be more successful and therefore more likely to pass along their genes to offspring. Eventually, the characteristics of the entire population will change over time, as natural selection favors individuals that are particularly well suited to their environment and eliminates individuals that are poorly suited to their environment. This process of change in response to environmental pressure is called **adaptation**. 

If the characteristics of a population, or part of a population, change so dramatically over time that the individuals would no longer be able to breed successfully with individuals from the original population, then a new species has arisen; this is called **speciation**. Speciation requires that a population become reproductively isolated from others of the same species, which can happen if part of a population becomes geographically isolated. For example, a rising mountain chain or an invasion by the sea might provide a physical barrier that separates two groups, or some individuals might migrate across a large river or to an island, thereby becoming isolated from the main population. In such cases the separated group must become adapted to a new and different environment. Before the separation occurred, the two groups were part of a single species; after the separation, as a result of adaptation through natural selection, they may eventually become so different that they can no longer interbreed successfully. The process of speciation resulting from geographic isolation is called allopatric speciation. Sympatric speciation occurs when populations become segregated and reproductively isolated without the presence of a geographic barrier.

In natural selection, then, certain genetic variants \(called alleles\) become more or less common as a result of the survival-related usefulness of the heritable traits that they confer. Another mechanism whereby certain alleles can become more or less common within a population, or even disappear altogether, is **genetic drift**, which results from random sampling of genes from one generation to the next. When reproduction samples the range of alleles available within a population, purely by chance the frequency \(or statistical distribution\) of alleles passed to offspring may not be exactly the same as in the parent population. The next generation will therefore be sampling from a slightly different genetic pool. Over time, this can have a significant effect, especially in small populations \(where one variation would have a proportionately greater impact than in a larger population\), and it is thought the genetic drift is an important contributor to evolution. 

An organism’s genetic sequence can also change through **mutation**, which happens spontaneously during the passage of genes from parents to offspring and can also be caused by environmental factors. Mutation is the main source for new genetic variants within a population. 

Natural selection is not random; it is driven by environmental change, so alleles that are beneficial for adaptation and conducive to reproductive success are selected for and tend to dominate over time. However, mutation and genetic drift are largely random processes; therefore, the genetic variations they introduce may be beneficial, harmful, or neutral to the organism and its reproductive success. They are not entirely unrelated processes, though; for example, mutation provides the genetic variety on which natural selection can act.



