# Inputs: The Stuff Life Is Made Of

The organisms of any ecosystem can be subdivided into producers and consumers according to the way they obtain their food, which is their source of energy and nutrients. Producers, or **autotrophs**, are organisms that make their own food. They use energy from sunlight or, in some cases, energy derived from chemicals in their environment to manufacture organic compounds such as carbohydrates. Consumers, or **heterotrophs**, get their food by feeding directly or indirectly on producers. 

It is often said that you are what you eat, and that statement is true not only for humans, but for all organisms. Our foods are all made up of more or less the same materials: molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur. So it doesn’t matter whether the organism is an autotroph or a heterotroph, it still utilizes the same six elements as food. What differs is the form \(that is, the molecular structure\) their food comes in. When heterotrophs such as humans eat bread, we are feeding ourselves on carbohydrates: large molecules formed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Even the lowliest microorganisms dine on carbon-bearing molecules such as carbon dioxide \(CO2\) or methane \(CH4\). The difference is that what is food for a microorganism may not seem like food to us!

CARBON The fundamental building block of all life on Earth is carbon. On our planet, wherever life is present, carbon must be present. If water is removed, the composition of all organisms, including humans, is dominated by carbon. No other chemical element can match carbon in the variety and complexity of the compounds it can form. Part of the reason for its versatility is that it can form four covalent bonds with itself and other elements \(see Figure 3.3\), which allows for a wide variety of structures. Carbon acts as the template around which all organic molecules, such as carbohydrates and proteins, are built. Thus, carbon is critically important to organisms because it goes into manufacturing every part of them, from genes to body structures. 

The biosphere largely controls the flux of carbon through the Earth system. Marine organisms extract carbon—which is present in seawater as dissolved CO2— to form carbonate shells and skeletons. When the organisms die, their skeletons settle to the seafloor, where they accumulate as sediments, effectively moving carbon from the biosphere to the lithosphere. The accumulation of the organic remains of organisms in freshwater wetlands and on the seafloor also moves carbon from the biosphere to the lithosphere. Over geologic time, these organic remains are transformed into oil, natural gas, and coal deposits. Today, when we extract and burn these deposits, we are moving carbon from the lithosphere to the atmosphere in the form of CO2 emissions. 

NUTRIENTS Nutrients are chemical elements or compounds that organisms require to live and grow. Common plant nutrients include the elements phosphorus, nitrogen, and potassium—the ones most commonly found in garden fertilizer. Other organisms also depend on iron and calcium. Some organisms can manufacture their own nutrients, but others must obtain them in their diets from materials in their environment. Some specialized microorganisms can obtain nutrients by dissolving minerals. 

WATER Life as we know it requires water \(H2O\). All organisms on Earth, including humans, are composed primarily of water, typically 50 to 95 percent. It is well known that humans can live for weeks without food, but most will perish in a few days without water. Even microorganisms that live in the atmosphere must obtain water from tiny droplets that condense around dust particles, and viruses must obtain water from their hosts. Water is the habitat in which life first emerged and in which much of it still thrives. Water’s chemical properties and the way it responds to changes in temperature make it an ideal medium for biological activity. The cells of all organisms are made up primarily of an aqueous solution that promotes the chemical reactions of life. Water also helps moderate Earth’s climate, which has supported life for at least 3.5 billion years \(see Chapter 15\). Water is such an important ingredient for life that the search for extraterrestrial life must begin with the search for water, as we will see at the end of this chapter. 

ENERGY All organisms need energy to live and grow. Some of the simplest organisms, such as single-celled algae, obtain energy from sunlight. Others acquire energy by breaking down chemicals in their environment. Heterotrophs get energy by feeding on other organisms. Energy is important because it fuels the conversion of simple molecules such as carbon dioxide and water into larger molecules, such as carbohydrates and proteins, which are essential for life.

