# Origin of Life and the Oldest Fossils

When Earth first formed some 4.5 billion years ago, it was lifeless and inhospitable. A billion years later, it was teeming with microorganisms. How did life begin? Along with other grand puzzles such as the origin of the universe, this question remains one of science’s greatest mysteries. 

The question of how life may have originated is very different from the question of why life originated. Science offers an approach only to understanding the “how” part of this mystery because, as you may recall from Chapter 1, it uses observations and experiments to create testable hypotheses. These hypotheses may explain the series of steps involved in the origin and evolution of life, and they can be tested by searching for evidence in the fossil and geologic records. However, observations and experiments do not provide a testable approach to the question of why life evolved. 

The fossil record tells us that single-celled microorganisms were the earliest forms of life, and that they evolved into all the multicellular organisms that are found in the younger parts of the geologic record. The fossil record also shows us that most of life’s history involved the evolution of microorganisms. We can find microfossils in rocks 3.5 billion years old, yet we can conclusively identify fossils of multicellular organisms only in rocks younger than 1 billion years. It therefore appears that microorganisms were the only organisms on Earth for at least 2.5 billion years! 

The theory of evolution predicts that these first microorganisms—and all life that came after them—evolved from a universal ancestor. What did this universal ancestor look like? We really don’t know, but most geobiologists agree that it must have had several important characteristics. The most crucial of these would be genetic information: instructions for growth and reproduction. Otherwise, it would have had no descendants. The universal ancestor must also have been composed of carbon-rich compounds. As we have seen, all organic substances, including organisms, are made principally of carbon. 

How did the universal ancestor arise? One approach to answering this question would be to search for clues in rocks. However, well-preserved fossils are found only in sedimentary rocks that have not been significantly affected by metamorphism or deformation. There are no well preserved sedimentary rocks from the time when life first evolved, so scientists must use other approaches. Laboratory chemists have played an important role here.

Most geobiologists agree that there was life on Earth 3.5 billion years ago, but are uncertain about how those early organisms functioned or obtained energy and nutrients. Some scientists argue that the oldest organisms on the universal tree of life were chemoautotrophic, obtaining their energy directly from chemicals in the environment. Furthermore, those oldest organisms may have been hyperthermophilic. This possibility suggests that life may have originated in very hot water, such as that in hot springs or hydrothermal vents on mid-ocean ridges, where sunlight was unavailable as an energy source, but chemicals were abundant.

