#  The Biosphere as a System

Life is everywhere on Earth. The **biosphere** is that part of our planet that contains all of its living organisms. It includes the plants and animals with which we are most familiar as well as the nearly invisible microorganisms that live in some of the most extreme environments on Earth. These organisms live on Earth’s surface, in its atmosphere and ocean, and within its upper crust, and they interact continuously with all of these environments. Because the biosphere intersects with the lithosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere, it can influence or even control basic geologic and climate processes. 

**Geobiology** is the study of these interactions between the biosphere and Earth’s physical environment. The biosphere is a system of interacting components that exchanges energy and matter with its surroundings. Inputs into the biosphere include energy \(usually in the form of sunlight\) and matter \(such as carbon, nutrients, and water\). Organisms use these inputs to function and grow. In the process, they create an amazing variety of outputs, some of which have important influences on geologic processes. At a local scale—such as that of a water-filled pore within loose sediment particles—a small group of organisms may have a geologic effect that is limited to a particular sedimentary environment. At larger scales, the activities of organisms may influence the concentrations of gases in the atmosphere or the cycling of certain elements through Earth’s crust.

