# Doing Science

Science advances by the application of the **scientific method**, a systematic approach to answering questions about the natural world. The scientific method implies that sufficient observation will reveal patterns that provide clues to the origin and history of Earth. We assume that the components of the universe interact in consistent, predictable ways. Scientists use their observations as an aid in predicting future events in the earth system and, in some cases, the universe.

### From Observation to Hypothesis 

All of us make observations that we use to mold our personal views of the cultural and physical worlds we inhabit. Scientists also use observations to shape ideas. Their ideas are known as hypotheses. A hypothesis is a testable explanation of facts or observations. For example, if we owned a Ford Mustang that broke down frequently, we might form a hypothesis that Mustangs or even all Fords were poorly built cars. Through experience, we test the limits of our personal world, allowing those limits to expand to accommodate a positive stimulus or shrink from a negative interaction. Suppose a friend is pleased with the performance of her Mustang. That might require us to modify our original interpretation. Personal observations may vary with the individual, but valid scientific observations are empirical—that is, they can be measured and confirmed by others. In that regard, we could collect data on a large number of Ford Mustangs and determine the average number of repairs per car over a specific period of time. We could then compare these data with repair rates for comparable vehicles to support or refute our original hypothesis. Further, others might be prompted to test a similarly large set of Mustangs to confirm our interpretation. 

### Inductive and Deductive Reasoning 

The scientific method is not a single set of steps like a recipe. It can take a variety of forms but includes some or all of the following— making observations, forming and testing hypotheses, developing predictions, planning and conducting experiments, analyzing data, and evaluating results. A scientific hypothesis is developed to provide a potential explanation of observations. Hypotheses can be generated and tested using two basic procedures: inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning. Inductive reasoning occurs when scientists draw general conclusions from specific observations. The success of this method comes from recognizing patterns and identifying similarities between comparable systems. 

Consider the following situation. Anne, an earth science professor, has students discuss the characteristics of different types of volcanoes with their neighbors during one of her classes. Later, she notices that the students do better on the exam questions about volcanoes than on other questions. She forms a hypothesis that students learn concepts better if they work together. She begins to assign daily exercises for the students to complete in small groups during class. Her average exam scores jump by 4.7 percent over previous classes. Anne is pleased that her students appear to be learning the material more thoroughly, and the students are pleased when she tells them that their grades are higher than expected. Anne has used inductive reasoning, drawing a general conclusion from specific observations. 

Anne describes her teaching experiment to Don, an instructor in the physics department. He tells her that he too started using group assignments in class. Don tells Anne that he read an article in a physics journal by a colleague at another university that described how the use of groups resulted in improved student learning. Don had done some additional reading about the use of these methods in other science classes and determined that several instructors achieved similar improvements. Consequently, he concluded that if groups could improve learning in other science classes, they would probably also help his students. Don used deductive reasoning because he used a general principle to reach a specific conclusion.

Students frequently confuse inductive and deductive reasoning, so consider two other examples. What type of reasoning \(inductive or deductive\) is used in the following pair of statements and why? 

1. All hurricanes form as low-atmospheric-pressure systems over oceans. Hurricane Harry is forming in the Atlantic. Hurricane Harry is a low-pressure system. 

2. Three massive hurricanes caused large amounts of damage to the United States during the 2005 hurricane season. Hurricane Katrina had a pressure of 902 millibars \(mbar\); Hurricane Rita, 898 mbar; and Hurricane Wilma, 882 mbar. Therefore, massive hurricanes with air pressures of around 900 mbar or less will cause large amounts of damage if they make landfall. 

The first scenario starts with a general statement about hurricanes and concludes with a specific statement about a single hurricane. Therefore, the reasoning is deductive—general to specific. The second scenario starts with specific data \(air pressures\) and ends with a general conclusion. This is inductive reasoning—specific to general. Most science involves components of both inductive and deductive reasoning.

### From Hypothesis to Theory

The best hypotheses are logical and can be readily tested by experiment or by more observations. Continued observations over time will either confirm that a hypothesis is accurate or reveal that it is not quite right and needs to be either further refined or rejected. New information sometimes becomes available with the development of increasingly sophisticated technology and may lead to minor or major changes in existing hypotheses. 

An initial hypothesis is a reasonable explanation on the basis of current science and needs further examination. After rigorous testing, bulked up with supporting facts and observations, a hypothesis may become a theory. The US National Academy of Sciences defines a scientific theory as “a well-substantiated explanation of some aspect of the natural world that can incorporate facts, laws, inferences, and tested hypotheses.” Note that in science, a theory is not just an opinion or a guess; it is a well-supported explanation of a natural phenomenon. \(For example, in Chapter 4 we will discuss the theory of plate tectonics.\) An even higher standard of scientific scrutiny is reserved for laws. Scientific laws are statements that are so strongly supported by theory and observations that they are considered unchanging in nature. The law of gravity is an example.

In our constantly changing world, hypotheses or even theories will be modified, and none can ever be completely proved. Widely accepted ideas will be confirmed and strengthened by the work of many scientists, but it is always possible that the next person to test the idea will discover a slightly different result and challenge part, or all, of the original hypothesis. The willingness to continually question prevailing ideas and to modify or discard them as new information becomes available is the strength of science. Science is an open book, a perpetual lie detector, limited only by the imagination and abilities of its practitioners. Given the complex nature of Earth, no scientist makes an observation, suggests a hypothesis, or develops a theory alone. The work of every scientist relies on the work of others who have gone before. Even Isaac Newton, whose law of gravity has withstood the test of time, noted, “If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.” Newton stood on the shoulders of a giant who lived 700 years earlier. For without doubt one of the greatest of the Abbasid scientists was the Iraqi Ibn al-Haytham \(born in AD965\), who is regarded as the world's first physicist and as the father of the modern scientific method - long before Renaissance scholars such as Bacon and Descartes.

