# Science is a Detective Story

Why do we care what you think about science? The United States is a world leader in scientific research and development. Government and corporate science programs flourish because of substantial investment in innovation and the discovery of new ideas. Even though survey results show that Americans are supportive of scientific research, most people have only a shaky grasp of underlying scientific principles. The National Science Foundation has conducted surveys that reveal that less than one-third of the adult population can define what it means to study something scientifically. Even if you do not make a career in science, it is important that you understand how to use scientific reasoning skills to make wise decisions as an informed citizen to help solve daily problems. 

**Science is a process of discovery that increases our body of knowledge.** Earth science is like all sciences; some of it is known and can be learned, and much of it is still waiting to be discovered. But science has another less tangible but equally important element—the innate curiosity of the scientists as they search for answers. Increasingly, individual citizens have the opportunity to become involved in a variety of scientific research projects that are too large to complete without the participation of a large number of talented amateur scientists. These projects can involve thousands of observations made by citizens over a limited time interval. They may involve volunteers with little or no training in collecting data or citizen researchers working with scientists in an online community. Examples of some of these projects follow. Which would you most like to be involved with? 

* Stardust: Volunteers help scientists find a handful of interstellar dust particles brought to Earth by the Stardust spacecraft and hiding among a million online images. 
* IceWatchUSA: This project by the Nature Abounds organization seeks to compile local climate records by making seasonal observations of ice conditions on water bodies.
* World Water Monitoring Day: Tens of thousands of people in more than 40 nations use simple sample kits to collect information on the characteristics of local streams and lakes. Data are then entered into an online database to be compared with results from subsequent years. 
* Project Budburst: This project seeks to track the timing of the leafing and flowering of native vegetation around North America. 
* FeederWatch: This data set yields information on the changes in native and alien species of birds using backyard bird feeders and can serve as a proxy indicator of environmental change. 
* Weather observers: Eleven thousand volunteers in the National Weather Service’s cooperative observer program collect daily temperature and precipitation readings to aid in weather forecasting and to help measure long-term climate change. 
* Did You Feel It?: This US Geological Survey \(USGS\) online program uses reports from people who feel earthquakes and graphs the data to create Community Internet Intensity Maps. For example, a recent 5.8 magnitude earthquake in Virginia generated more nearly 150,000 citizen reports from people in states up and down the east coast. 

Earth scientists combine their basic knowledge of facts and concepts with technical skills to explore Earth and solve its mysteries. It is tempting to view science as a list of facts to be memorized and repeated. But the real essence of science is a detective story in which teams of investigators piece together evidence to generate well-founded explanations of the workings of our planet. Scientists constantly refine or challenge these explanations, causing some to be discarded while others gain wide acceptance. Our imaginations and the physical laws of nature present the only limits to science. Throughout this book, we will strive to give you an inside look at how science is done and to initiate you in the process of discovery. Whenever possible, we will feature real-life situations and pose questions that place you in the role of the scientist.

