# The Characteristics of Good Science

Good scientific explanations follow four basic principles: 

1. Principle: Scientific explanations are provisional \(tentative\) and can and do change. These changes are not always popular. A few years ago, new data on bodies orbiting at the fringe of the solar system resulted in the reclassification of Pluto to a dwarf planet. While science can change, we would emphasize that many of the key concepts discussed in this and other science books have been stable for a long time, some of them well established for centuries. Many of the changes occur in the details of the scientific explanations, rather than the major concepts themselves. 

2. Principle: Scientific explanations should be predictable and testable. The daily weather forecast is a result of meteorologists using their knowledge of how air and moisture circulate through the atmosphere to predict short-term changes in weather patterns. The idea that hypotheses must be testable brings up a very important point about science. In science, one must be able to test a hypothesis or theory to determine if it could be false. That seems odd, does it not? Scientists construct a hypotheses or a theory to explain nature and then argue that the work is not science unless their idea has the potential to be found to be false. The central idea is this: science deals with the physical world. When we propose a hypothesis, we think it is true. Any additional experiments or observations should either support the hypothesis or show it to be false. Science progresses as hypotheses and theories are tested and shown to be supported \(or not\). If you cannot test a hypothesis, you are not doing science. Can you think of an idea that cannot be shown to be false \(or true for that matter\)? 

3. Principle: Scientific explanations are based on observations or experiments and are reproducible. For example, scientists studying glaciers on different continents have noted that most are decreasing in size \(see Chapter 16\). These observations can be made routinely by photographing and measuring the dimensions of individual glaciers over several years or decades and are readily confirmed by others willing to visit the same locations. The important characteristic of science lies with the empirical, reproducible data used to support or refute a hypothesis. Scientific results are discussed openly at conferences and published in journals so that all ideas are exposed to review by other scientists \(peers\). This peer review process ensures that published research is original and adds to the body of valid scientific information. Rogue scientists who publish false data to advance their careers are often discredited by other scientists who are unable to reproduce the original results. 

4. Principle: A valid scientific hypothesis offers a well-defined natural cause or mechanism to explain a natural event. Science looks for a cause for every effect. A tsunami is caused by an underwater earthquake; an earthquake is caused by movement of tectonic plates; tectonic plates move because Earth is releasing internal heat energy \(more on all this in Chapter 4\). Sometimes these cause-and-effect relationships are complicated, with multiple causes influencing the end result. For example, changes in Earth’s climate are caused by effects from every component of the earth system including the composition of the atmosphere, oceanic circulation patterns, the combustion of fossil fuels, plant respiration, and our position relative to the sun. Ongoing research is attempting to determine just how much each of these factors influences climate change.

